The goal of this video is to produce a multiplication table that's going to look like this.
In fact this is a matrix.
But you can imagine that this is a table of products, a table of multiplications between numbers in this
column and the numbers in this row.
So for example forty eight equals eight times six.
And let's see nine times seven is sixty three.
So this is the main goal, your main goal, for this video is to pause the video and produce a table or a matrix
that looks exactly like this.
So good luck working through this.
It's actually... there's a couple of tricky parts in here that's not quite as simple as you might initially
think it is.
So good luck working through this.
And now I am going to switch to Python and show you my solution.
So my solution to this problem is to consider that if we have a matrix called let's call it matmult
for matrix multiplication, then essentially the i-th row or the element in the i-th row and the J-th column
should be equal to column I times... sorry row i Times column J.
So this is generally the approach that I'm going to take.
Now this needs to be embedded inside a couple of for loops and in fact I think I will change these
to
rowi and coli, just to make it a little bit more readable.
So row I and col i.
So now of course we're going need to loop over rows and what do we loop over rows in?
Well, we could specify this to be a range that goes from one to 10, but then here we also have to have
a range, the same exact range.
So in fact what I'm going to do is create this as a variable, so let's say numbers equals range num to
10.
And actually this should be it should go up to 10.
So I have to print eleven here type eleven here to now I say for row I in numbers and then also for
col i in numbers.
Okay.
So I'm going to just run the code how it is here and see if we get any progress.
Aha.
Okay.
So this says name matmult is not defined. So we need to define this matrix before we start using it.
So to do this I'm going to say matmult equals, now what I'd like to do is initialize this with zeroes
using the numpy matrix so the size is going to have to be basically 10 by 10 or however long nums
is.
Now I could write 10 by 10 but this would be an example of hard coding. If we wanted to make a bigger
matrix multiplication table let's say you know up to 14 then this is no longer valid.
So what I'm going to do is write len for length this function for length nums and then again Len nums.
Okay.
And then set that back to 11.
So now I'm going to run this code again and... oops it says name np not defined.
So that means I need to import the numpy module and to do that I actually prefer to put that in its
own cell on top of here.
So I'm going to press insert, insert cell above.
Now I can write import numpy as np. Run that cell.
Run this cell.
Okay.
This is a actually a stupid mistake.
Sometimes I make mistakes in here on purpose so I can show you what the error messages look like.
This was actually really just a typo.
Huh.
Okay so index ten is out of bounds for axis one with size 10.
So what is the problem here?
The problem is happening on this line here.
Line 7.
So this line and now how do we go about figuring out an error like this.
So there is an indexing problem somewhere in here.
What I'm going to do is say print rowi comma coli.
I now what this is going to do is print out the row column index each time it's running through this
loop. And that's going to help me decode this problem; it's gonna help me figure out what is going wrong
here.
Okay.
And I think we can already see what the problem is.
And the problem is that I start this range at 1 and that makes sense because I want the multiplication
table to start at 1.
However Python starts indexing at 0.
So here we are already trying to access the second element with index of 1 so therefore what I'm going to
do is write minus one.
So row I minus one coli minus one.
that makes sense.
Now let's think about what happens at the first iteration of this loop.
So row I equals one, coli equals 1 but because this is actually the first element in the Matrix, the
first row in the first column we need to specify this to be zero and zero.
Okay so let's see.
I believe that this is going to work now.
Okay.
So we get a lot of numbers which is fine.
And now let's see what this table looks like.
So matmult.
So these this is starting to look good.
This is getting somewhere.
We can look through a few of these elements individually, so for example six times six equals thirty
six.
And about three times nine equals twenty seven, so you know just picking out a couple of these numbers
here just to make sure that we've implemented this piece of code correctly.
So nine times two is 18.
Okay.
Now there's a few things that we need to fix here.
One is that we need this to be printed out in nice looking latex code.
So therefore I'm going to write from IPython dot display import display and math
Man, I'm making a bunch of typos tonight :(
Okay.
And now that I've imported these two functions I'm going to type display and then math.
And now we wanted to do.
Oh we need to convert this into latex.
Okay.
So that means that we're also going to need to import the sympy module, so import sympy as sym.
All right.
So now let's try this.
Mm hmm.
Okay.
So this doesn't really look very readable.
And what is the problem here?
The problem is that matmut, this variable this matrix here, this is actually a numpy array, but we
need to convert this into a sympy object.
So I'm going to write sym dot sympify, and this function, sympify, will convert this
from a numpy array into a sympy object, and then we can convert that into latex code and then that goes
into the math function which goes into the display function.
All right.
So this is starting to look good.
We're almost there.
The main difference now from how we showed in the slide is that this is all these all decimal points
here but the decimal points are all zeros because we're just multiplying integers.
There's no need for any floating point numeric precision.
So how can we get rid of all of these zeros here?
Well you might think about converting this into an integer using the int function like this.
However it turns out that that is not going to work.
So the int function works on scalars but not on full matrices.
So there's probably more than one solution here but the solution that I'm going to come up with is to
specify that this matrix when I create this matrix here this matrix should be only available for integers.
So let's look at the help file in numpy dot zeros.
OK.
So in fact already this is telling us that the second optional input after the shape, which is what I
have here so 10 by 10.
The second optional input is dtype equals float.
So let's see what dtype means.
OK.
So dtype is data type and it's an optional input and we know that it's an optional input as well because
it says equals.
And then this will be the default value. What I'm going to do is specify that the data type so dtype
equals int for integers.
All right.
And that means that matrix multiplication,
So this variable here, this matrix, is limited to integers. It's only going to be storing integers not
floats.
Okay.
So that's basically the end of the assignment here.
That's the end of the exercise.
There's one more thing that I would like to mention, which is about this display function.
So I always embed the math function inside the display function.
But if you were taking the opportunity to play around with this code, which of course I strongly recommend
doing, then you might have accidentally discovered that if you remove this display function then you
get essentially the same results.
So why do we need this display function in the first place?
And the answer for that is basically that whether you need that display function depends on where this
line of code is relative to the cell.
So for example let's say I want to create a variable called X and I set X to be three.
Huh...
So now I run the code again.
You don't get any errors, but we also don't see this beautiful latex formatted matrix.
And now let's see what happens if I put the display function back here and now I still get the Matrix
and I can also have more code after.
So in case you discovered that and you are curious about it, now you know the answer: essentially you
only need this display function
if the math function is not at the very end of these cell. So therefore just as a general matter of good
practice, I will always have the display function even if it happens to be at the end of the cell like
this.